<!-- image -->

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

## Approved by:

Asad Alam and Marcello Estevão (IDA) and Catherine  Pattillo  and  Guillaume  Chabert (IMF)

Prepared by the staff of the International Development Association (IDA) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF)


The baseline in this Debt Sustainability Analysis update (DSA) reflects several changes with respect to the previous DSA of July 2022, including updating the financing assumptions to reflect the global tightening in financing conditions, the discovery of oil pre-sale advances to the Eastern and Southern African Trade Development Bank, a pre-existing loan arrangement with the National Investment Development Bank, and updates to the debt with commercial creditors including China Exim Bank thanks to the reconciliation of debt between the authorities and creditors. South Sudan's debt remains assessed to be sustainable with a high risk of debt distress for both external and overall public debt. 1 Three  of  the  four  key  indicators  of  public  and  publicly  guaranteed  external  debt  breach  the  threshold  in  the short/medium term, with debt service to revenue remaining above the threshold through 2029/30, and debt serviceto-exports through FY2025/26. The present value of overall debt-to-GDP ratio decreases below the threshold starting in FY2026/27. There are several downside risks to the sustainability assessment, including global external financing conditions, decreased oil revenues from drops in production due to climate-related disasters or volatility in global oil prices,  slow  implementation  of  reforms  in  particular  on  public  financial  management,  a  breakdown  in  the  peace process and the resumption of large-scale civil conflict.

1  South Sudan's debt-carrying capacity remains rated 'weak' with composite indicator score of 1.33 according to the October 2022 vintage of World Economic Outlook and the 2021 Country Policy and Institutional Assessment index of the World Bank.

1. The DSA is limited to central government debt, as data access and availability remains weak. Debt data collection and compilation presents serious weaknesses in South Sudan. SOEs are omitted from the DSA as information about SOE debt and government guarantees is incomplete or unavailable. 2  External debt is defined using the currency criterion. The analysis for the contingent liability stress test includes SOE debt, financial market shocks, and a 5 percent shock to GDP to include the potential repayment of salary arrears to embassies' staff, and other potential arrears or financing shocks.
2. South Sudan's total public debt was estimated at US$3,457 million (67 percent of GDP) as of December 2021 (Text Table 2). Debt to the World Bank amounted to US$79.8 million on IDA terms, while debt to the African Development Bank (AfDB) amounted to US$19 million. Debt to the IMF includes the two disbursements under the Rapid Credit Facility (RCF) of November 2020 and April 2021, and the use of US$150 million from the SDR allocation for budget support. 3  The debt stock with Afrexim bank was US$464 million at the end of CY2021. Bilateral creditors include China Exim Bank through two different facilities  with  a  total  remaining  debt  estimated  at  US$372  million  at  end-December  2021. 4   Amongst commercial creditors the outstanding liability to the Qatar National Bank was amounting to US$586 million at the end of 2021. The debt stock at the end of 2021 also included an outstanding debt of US$550 million

<!-- image -->

2   Addressing the lack of coverage of SOE will require significant efforts in terms of data gathering and possibly technical support to produce the information. There are only a few SOEs in South Sudan with significant economic activity, the largest being Nilepet-the state-owned National Oil and Gas Company of South Sudan.

3  The authorities used US$150 million from the SDR allocation to finance spending, mostly to reduce salary arrears. This amount, consistent with the Guidance Note of August 2021 on the treatment and use of SDR allocations, has been included in the external debt stock starting in FY2021/2022 for the purposes of this DSA.

4  One facility with a remaining debt of US$135 million was included in the previous DSA. Another facility with a remaining debt estimated at US$237 million at end-December 2021 came to light during the debt stocktaking exercise conducted by an international auditing firm.

owed  to  oil  companies,  an  estimated  outstanding  debt  of  US$107  million  to  the  National  Investment Development Bank (NIDB), and an estimated outstanding debt  of  US$200  million to the  Eastern  and Southern African Trade Development Bank. 5  Domestic debt is mostly owed to the central bank but also includes a relatively small share of debt due to local commercial banks (around 20 percent).

3. Domestic  salary  arrears  have  been  fully  cleared. While  arrears  to  government  employees  had increased during the first half of FY2021/22, the MoFP has taken steps to clear the arrears, and as of October 2022 domestic salaries are current. Arrears to foreign missions stand at about USD 150 million (about 2 percent of GDP), however the MoFP is paying salaries to foreign missions' employees and taking steps to clear the arrears.

5  The NIDB loan was issued before the start of SMP and came to light in spring 2022. The authorities have recently supplied staff with documentation of transactions with NIDB during the period of the SMP. The Eastern and Southern African Trade Development Bank came to light recently and according to the debt stocktake by the international auditor has been repaid within FY2021/22. Reconciliation of the data is still in progress.

An additional 5 percent of GDP has been added to the contingency liability test to take into account the repayment of salary arrears to diplomats in foreign missions and other potential obligations including discovery of additional legacy debts and/or arrears on goods and services a stocktake on which is being conducted with assistance from USAID.

4. While South Sudan's Transitional Financial Arrangement (TFA) with Sudan has been completed as of February 2022, it has continued to transfer the same amount of crude oil to Sudan as before resulting in an accumulation of credit. The timing of when Sudan will pay for the accumulated credit is not yet known, and it appears that modifying the practical arrangements of crude oil transferred to Sudan (about 22 thousand barrels per day) will not be immediate. As of the end of FY2021/22, the estimated accumulated credit with Sudan amounts to about US$300 million (around 4 percent of GDP) for the value of crude oil transferred in excess of obligations under the TFA.
5. The Bank of South Sudan is taking action towards developing the domestic market. The BoSS introduced  a  term  deposit  facility  (TDF)  in  spring  2022.  After  some  initial  experimentation,  and subsequent  consultation  with  banks,  it  succeeded  in  mopping  up  24  billion  SSP  in  four  consecutive auctions between early September and end-November 2022, at average annualized interest rates of below 10 percent. The uptake by banks suggests that private-sector confidence in the authorities' macroeconomic management is improving, and there appears to be significant interest in BoSS expanding the range of maturities under the TDF beyond the 14-day and 28-day maturities currently being offered. A rollout of auctions at 90-day and 180-day maturities is planned over the next years; if successful, it could mark  a  significant  step  towards  the  re-introduction  of  treasury  bills  as  a  possible  source  of  domestic financing.
6. This DSA assumes that the financing gaps will be closed mostly with non-concessional external loans. While  the  proposed  PMB  includes  a  condition  on  no  new  non-concessional  borrowing,  this  analysis includes forecasted non-concessional borrowing to cover financing needs. This represents a worse-case scenario, in which concessional financing does not materialize. A financing gap is estimated to occur starting in FY2022/23 and to persist in the medium term. This analysis projects-starting in CY2023-new disbursements by bilateral, non-Paris club lenders with 8-percent interest rate, 7-year maturity, and 2 years grace period, and also assumes that starting in FY2024/25 there will be issuance of medium-long term domestic debt (initially about 10 percent of government financing needs), predicated on sustained macroeconomic stability and improved fiscal position.  As has been the case in the past, the remaining financing gaps are assumed to be closed using non-concessional loans with 8-percent interest rate, 5-year maturity, and 1-year grace period. The assumptions on the terms of nonconcessional borrowing from unidentified external sources are in line with the terms of existing debt instruments and the global tightening in borrowing conditions (the average nominal interest rate on external debt is 5.9 percent in FY2021/22).
7. The forecasted real GDP growth shows slightly lower growth in the medium term with respect to the previous DSA (Text Table 3). Real GDP growth in FY2022/23 is forecasted at -0.4  percent, mostly reflecting the continued issues with oil production due to climate-related flooding of oil fields. Non-oil GDP is

projected to recover  in  FY2022/23 as the harvested  area has been expanding, reflecting the fact that although historic floods continued in CY2022, impacts are estimated to be less severe when compared to CY2021. Additionally, due to positive base effects, non-oil GDP grew by 6.0 percent in FY2021/22 and is forecasted to grow by 7.3 percent in FY2022/23. Overall growth is expected to recover in FY2023/24 onwards,  in  line  with  oil  production  and  better  agricultural  production  as  domestic  security  conditions improve.  The  slightly  lower  growth  path  in  the  medium  term  reflects  global  headwinds  and  fiscal consolidation.

8. Primary expenditures are lower compared to the previous DSA. The previous analysis assumed that transit and processing fees to Sudan would significantly increase and that the financial transfer to Sudan as part of the TFA would end. The current analysis instead assumes stable transit and processing fees, and reflects the continuation of TFA payments (notwithstanding the completion of the TFA agreement) incorporating it not as an expenditure but as negative financing. As a result, expenditures decline because the TFA is now classified below the line as financing. Accordingly, the primary balance is higher in the current vintage, and remains in surplus throughout the medium term.

9. Imports are projected to be lower in percentage of GDP then previously forecasted. The continuation  of  payments  to  Sudan  in  excess  of  the  TFA  agreement  is  forecasted  to  reduce  the government's fiscal space in the short and medium term, impacting resources available to support imports, in addition to the impact of Russia's invasion of Ukraine on international aid and the potential impact of decreased  aid  on  food  and  other  imports  of  goods.  This  results  in  a  higher  current  account  balance compared to the previous DSA vintage. Exports, after peaking in FY2021/22 and FY2022/23 thanks to an increase in the price of oil, are projected to gradually decline reflecting the assumption of lower global oil prices over the medium term and in outer years.
10. Oil price projections have been revised down slightly for the near term compared to the July 2022 DSA, to reflect the latest oil market forecasts. In the medium term, oil prices are forecast to be slightly higher to reflect the better-than-expected price for South Sudan crude oil (previous projections assumed a discount in the price of South Sudan's oil relative to international benchmarks)
11. Average inflation is expected to rise to 16.5 percent in FY2022/23 . This increase is mainly due to  the  recent  SSP  depreciation,  with  inflation  forecasted  to  gradually  decline  to  single  digits  over  the medium  term  on  the  assumption  that  the  restoration  of  prudent  money  growth  proves  lasting.  The assumption is that the BoSS stabilizes money growth at below 10 percent per year, in line with proposed PMB quantitative targets and stated BoSS policy. Reserve money sharply increased in the second half of FY2021/22, but authorities have since halted monetary financing and are taking steps to operationalize the reserve money targeting framework. As a result, inflation is forecasted to settle around 8-9 percent after the  effects  of  the  recent  episode  of  monetary  financing  wear  off.  In  line  with  historical  evidence,  the exchange rate is assumed to move one-for-one with the money supply in the medium term. Auctions of FX are  ongoing,  albeit  at  reduced  volumes  reflecting  improved  FX  liquidity  in  the  market  and  a  prudent management of SSP liquidity by the BoSS.

12. The fiscal  adjustment realism tool highlights the increases in the primary balance. The three-year adjustment in primary balance is higher than 2.5 percentage points of GDP, as it is forecasted

to  increase  from  3.9  percent  of  GDP  in  FY2022/23  to  8  percent  in  2023/24.  This  reflects  mainly  the rationalization of capital spending from the very high levels (nearly 12 percent of GDP) in the FY2022/23 budget. However, the improvement in the below-the-line balance is minimal, as the continued payments to Sudan and the repayment of existing debt and debt service contribute to a sizeable financing gap. The oil-for-infrastructure project (around 8 percent GDP in 2022/23) is assumed to continue for at least the next 3 years (through 2024/25). During this period, other (budgetary) capital spending is assumed to grow in proportion with nominal GDP. After the end of the oil-for-infrastructure project, budgetary capital spending is assumed to increase, to make up for the end of the road project, from 2.4 percent of GDP to around 4.5 percent in 2025/26 and 9.5 percent in 2026/27, and then forecasted to stabilize around 5 percent in the long run. The assumptions also include the disbursements related to the peace process such as for the unification of the armed forces and the constitution of the National Assembly in August 2021. However, these expenditures are not assumed to persist in future years due to their ad-hoc nature and their relation to the peace agreement which is expected to be completed in 2024. Related downside risks include the breakdown of the peace process and the resumption of large-scale conflict.

13. The fiscal multiplier realism tool flags an optimistic growth path. The growth path is assumed to be only minorly affected by the fiscal changes, as the increases in the primary balance are driven by reductions in low-multiplier spending, such as the end of excess transfers to Sudan.

14. SSD's debt carrying capacity remains classified as weak (Text Table 4). The composite indicator score (CI) of South Sudan is evaluated at 1.33, a slight decrease from the score of 1.36 of the previous vintage

DSA update. The CI score is determined by the World Bank's Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) and other variables such as real GDP growth and import coverage of foreign exchange reserves. South Sudan's latest CI score is based on the October 2022 WEO and 2021 CPIA.

<!-- image -->

15. This DSA includes a tailored stress test for lower oil prices and an additional 5 percent of GDP in the contingent liability test. The commodity price stress test features a one standard deviation decline in oil prices and a 6-year period for closing the financing gap that arises. This DSA does not include the market financing tailored test, as it is not applicable yet to South Sudan. The contingent liability stress test has been tailored to include an additional 5 percent of GDP to account for the arrears to diplomats in foreign missions, which are estimated to amount around US$150 million, and other potential obligations including discovery of additional legacy debt or confirmation of arrears on goods and services (see ¶3). The arrears to diplomats and those on goods and services do not trigger an in-debt distress assessment: although a schedule for repayment has not been confirmed yet, the government has started clearing these arrears and is paying salaries to employees in foreign missions.

16. The risk of external debt distress for South Sudan is assessed as high given the baseline projections with the current borrowing assumptions. The PV of external-debt-to-GDP ratio under the baseline scenario breaches the threshold through FY2024/25 (Figure 1, Table 1, and Table 3). and is forecasted to remain below the threshold in the medium term. The PV of debt-to-exports ratio remains below the threshold throughout the period in the baseline analysis. The debt service-to-revenue ratio and debt service-to-exports ratio indicators breach the thresholds in the short/medium term (Figure 1, Table 1, and Table 3). In the baseline scenario, the external debt service-to-exports ratio breaches the threshold through FY2024/25. The debt service-to-revenue ratio exceeds its thresholds until FY2029/30.

17. The  indicators  of  external  debt  are  sensitive  to  the  commodity  price  and  contingent liabilities shocks . The most extreme shock within the tests is a decline in commodity prices, which in the case of  South  Sudan is the price of  oil.  This  highlights  downside  risks  posed  to  the  South  Sudanese economy by the volatility in commodity prices. The debt-service-to-exports and the debt-service-to revenue indicators are the most affected under this scenario, as the bulk of exports and revenues derive from oil. In addition, the historical scenario breaches the threshold in three out of four indicators of external debt, highlighting how debt sustainability in South Sudan is dependent on the continued enforcement of policies to safeguard macroeconomic stability to foster strong and inclusive growth.

18. The risk of public debt distress for South Sudan is assessed as high. The PV of total public debt-to-GDP ratio is forecasted to breach the threshold until FY2026/27 in the baseline scenario (Figure 2 and Table 4). The indicator is forecasted to be above the threshold at 54 percent in FY2021/22, and to subsequently decrease to 47.2 in FY2022/23 and 46.2 in FY2023/24.

19. The results of the bound tests highlight the need to shore up and diversify revenues. The most severe scenario amongst the bound tests is the primary balance scenario, in which the PV of debtto-GDP ratio breaches the threshold through 2030/31.

20. South  Sudan's  debt  remains  assessed  as  sustainable,  however  there  are  substantial downside  risks  to  the  baseline  scenario. Under  the  baseline  scenario,  all  debt  indicators  would decrease below the respective thresholds after FY2029/30. The external debt service-to-revenue ratio (which reaches 36.7 in FY2021/22 and remains above the threshold through FY2029/30) is in part due to the  expensive  debt  service  to  be  repaid  in  the  medium  term  and  to  the  conservative  assumptions  on financing terms to close the estimated financing needs. The country's debt financing outlook is heavily dependent on mobilizing non-concessional financing from external sources, and thus presents a major source of risk given the global backdrop of rising borrowing costs, widening risk premiums and volatility in capital  flows.  Efforts  to  improve  debt  management  (including  through  an  external  debt  stocktake)  and public financial management practices, domestic revenue mobilization, and development of a domestic

market  are  currently  underway.  While  the  stocktake  of  debt  by  an  international  auditor  is  a  one-time exercise, Fund and World Bank TA is supporting the strengthening of debt management within the MoFP, with  the  recommendation  that  authorities  perform  and  publish  an  internal  stocktake  quarterly.  These reforms are of paramount importance to ensure that high-cost loans are avoided, that other (currently nonviable) financing options such as domestic borrowing become available, and that debt carrying capacity improves over time. In addition, limiting monetization of the deficit and restoring prudent money growth is necessary to ensure inflation gradually declines to single digits. Sustaining these reforms over the medium term, in conjunction with other ongoing macro-fiscal reforms to anchor fiscal discipline is critical to the debt sustainability  assessment.  In  addition,  improvements  in  data  quality  will  be  important,  as  there  are continued weaknesses in data access and availability, as well as non-negligible residuals in projections.

21. The  bound  tests  and  tailored  test  results  highlight  the  risks  to  South  Sudan's  debt sustainability (Table 3). The present value of external debt-to GDP ratio remains above the threshold through FY2027/28 in the commodity price test and in the contingent liability test. The present value of external debt-to-exports ratio is above the threshold between FY2023/24 and FY2025/26 in the commodity price test but remains below the threshold in the contingency test. Both the debt service-to-exports ratio indicator and the debt service-to-revenue ratio for external debt breach the threshold in the medium term in the two stress test scenarios. Finally, the indicator for present value of debt-to-GDP ratio remains above the threshold through FY2024/25 in the tailored commodity price stress test, and through FY2027/28 in the combined contingency liability test. The commodity price tailored test highlights the risks posed by volatility in oil prices and the importance of investing in gradually diversifying the economy to expand the role of agriculture as main contributor to South Sudan's GDP.

22. The deterioration in global conditions poses an additional challenge to debt sustainability for South Sudan. Russia's invasion of  Ukraine has led to an increase in food and refined fuel prices, and deteriorating food access in an already fragile country. In addition, the war is also expected to have a negative impact on international aid, on which South Sudan is highly reliant, as donors may divert funds and  also  decrease  aid  due  to  tightening  domestic  fiscal  conditions.  The  tightening  of  global  financial conditions  may  also  pose  risks  by  making  it  more  difficult  and  expensive  for  South  Sudan  to  access external financing, in turn making servicing existing debt more expensive. These factors, together with the risk of weak governance of reforms and spending and climate-related natural disasters, also heighten the risk of social unrest, civil conflict, and increased violence. Overall, South Sudan has very limited space to absorb any of these shocks, and therefore continues to be assessed at high risk of debt distress.

23. The authorities agreed with the assessment of the DSA. They recognized the importance of remaining current on their debts, discontinuing oil advances, avoiding highly non-concessional borrowings, and the prudent fiscal and monetary policies discussed in the staff report to improve South Sudan's debt sustainability .

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

1/ Data cover Fund-supported programs for LICs (excluding emergency financing) approved since 1990. The size of 3-year adjustment inception is found on the horizontal axis, the percent of sample is found on the vertical axis

<!-- image -->

1/ Bars refer to annual projected fiscal adjustment (righthand side scale) and lines show possible real GDP growth paths under different fiscal multipliers (left hand side scale)

<!-- image -->