<!-- image -->

May 4, 2020

## DJIBOUTI

REQUESTS FOR DISBURSEMENT UNDER THE RAPID CREDIT FACILITY AND DEBT RELIEF UNDER THE CASTASTROPHE CONTAINMENT AND RELIEF TRUSTDEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS 1

Approved By Taline Koranchelian and

Gavin Gray (IMF) and Marcello Estevão (IDA)


Prepared by the staffs of the International Monetary Fund and the International Development Association.

## DJIBOUTI

This updated Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) concludes that Djibouti is at high risk of debt distress. This reflects the fact that the present value (PV) of the external debt-to-GDP ratio breaches its threshold during 2020-26 and the debt service-to-revenue ratio increases and largely stays above its threshold from 2022 onward. However, the authorities are expected to be able to service their debt under current terms. Debt is therefore assessed as sustainable.

Compared to the previous DSA (September 2019), it points to a deterioration in debt indicators, reflecting the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on macroeconomic prospects. The baseline macroeconomic assumptions for this update are consistent with those underpinning the authorities' request for IMF support under the RCF and the CCRT:

- Djibouti is facing large negative demand and supply shocks that are projected to reduce 2020 real GDP growth to -1 percent. The shocks are expected to be temporary and followed by a strong recovery-10 percent growth in 2021, stabilizing around 6 percent by 2025.
- Additional health and other priority expenditures will be necessary this year to address the pandemic and its economic and social consequences, and the shocks are projected to reduce government revenue. As a result, the government fiscal deficit will increase to 4.5 percent of GDP this year before gradually declining to 1.3 percent over the medium term. Baseline projections assume a significant reduction in debt-financed infrastructure projects implemented by SOEs. For the purpose of the debt service-to-revenue ratio, the net income that SOEs can use for debt service is assumed to be equal to the total debt service due by SOEs (see footnote 1 in Figure 1).
- Lower external demand is expected to temporarily widen the underlying current account balance (excluding re-exports) this year, to about 3.6 percent of GDP. Foreign direct investment (FDI) is also projected to drop by 40 percent. The resulting balance of payments financing need of about 4.8 percent of GDP is assumed to be financed through IMF support under the RCF and the CCRT, as well as donor support at favorable terms.

The debt sustainability assessment takes into consideration the understanding reached with Exim Bank of China in 2019 to restructure the railway loan and accumulated arrears, which is expected to be finalized soon. It also hinges upon the implementation of a range of fiscal and debt management reforms. This includes efforts to address and prevent recurrence of external arrears and to rapidly ramp up operations of several key projects to generate the revenues necessary for debt service. A combination of policies to reduce the pace of borrowing and prioritizing concessional financing and FDI, as well as reforms to strengthen the fiscal framework, public investment management, SOEs oversight, and debt management capacity are also necessary.

The authorities are committed to promptly resolve their outstanding external arrears, which are assessed to be below the de minimis threshold of 1 percent of GDP. As of end-March 2020, Djibouti had an outstanding stock of arrears to bilateral creditors in the order of 3.3 percent of GDP. The authorities have indicated that arrears reflect delays in finalizing conversions and cancellation agreements and arrears of a technical nature (due to weak debt management capacity and not indicative of a fundamental payment incapacity) or reflecting diplomatic disagreements. They have expressed a commitment to engage with their creditors to address these expeditiously. On this basis, and in accordance with paragraph 90 of the LIC DSF guidance note, external debt arrears excluding arrears related to technical or diplomatic issues stand at 0.97 percent of GDP and are therefore assessed to be below the de minimis threshold of 1 percent of GDP.

## Figure 1. Djibouti: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt Under Alternatives Scenarios, 2020-2030

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Baseline

Historical scenario

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Most extreme shock 2/

Threshold

<!-- image -->


Note: "Yes" indicates any change to the size or interactions of the default settings for the stress tests. "n.a." indicates that the stress test does not apply.

* Note: All the additional financing needs generated by the shocks under the stress tests are assumed to be covered by PPG external MLT debt in the external DSA. Default terms of marginal debt are based on baseline 10-year projections.

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Consistent with paragraph 22 of the Guidance Note on the Bank-Fund LIC DSA framework, the debt-service-to-revenue liquidity ratio is calculated as the ratio of total public sector interests and amortizations to central government revenues augmented by the net income that SOEs can use for debt service. Given that data limitations do not allow for a detailed cash flow analysis of SOEs, the net income that SOEs can use for debt service is assumed to be equal to the total debt service due by SOEs. This assumption may entail an under-estimation of SOEs' capacity to service debt, to the extent that they generate higher cash flows that could be used for debt service. However, while data on gross operating balances (a concept somewhat equivalent to the EBITDA) are available for most large SOEs, using those to estimate net income that SOEs can use for debt service would lead to a considerable over-estimation of SOEs' capacity to service debt. This is because these data do not account for the cash flows used by SOEs to self-finance large investment programs. In addition, aggregating these surpluses would entail considering that revenue from SOEs are fungible-i.e. that these are resources that can be used to service any debt-which is not the case.

2/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in or before 2030. Stress tests with one-off breaches are also presented (if any), while these one-off breaches are deemed away for mechanical signals. When a stress test with a one-off breach happens to be the most extreme shock even after disregarding the one-off breach, only that stress test (with a one-off breach) would be presented.

3/ The magnitude of shocks used for the commodity price shock stress test are based on the commodity prices outlook prepared by the IMF research department.

Figure 2. Djibouti: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2020-2030

<!-- image -->


* Note: The public DSA allows for domestic financing to cover the additional financing needs generated by the shocks under the stress tests in the public DSA. Default terms of marginal debt are based on baseline 10-year projections.

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in or before 2030. The stress test with a one-off breach is also presented (if any), while the one-off breach is deemed away for mechanical signals. When a stress test with a one-off breach happens to be the most exterme shock even after disregarding the one-off breach, only that stress test (with a one-off breach) would be presented.

<!-- image -->

## Figure 4. Djibouti: Realism Tools

3-Year Adjustment in Primary Balance (Percentage points of GDP)

<!-- image -->

1/ Data cover Fund-supported programs for LICs (excluding emergency financing) approved since 1990. The size of 3-year adjustment from program inception is found on the horizontal axis; the percent of sample is found on the vertical axis.

(% of GDP) Public and Private Investment Rates

<!-- image -->

6

Fiscal Adjustment and Possible Growth Paths 1/

1/ Bars refer to annual projected fiscal adjustment (right-hand side scale) and lines show possible real GDP growth paths under different fiscal multipliers (left-hand side scale).

<!-- image -->

Contribution to Real GDP growth (percent, 5-year average)

<!-- image -->

Table 1. Djibouti: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2017-2040

## (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.

2/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g) + Ɛα (1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms, Ɛ=nominal appreciation of the local currency, and α= share of local currency-denominated external debt in total external debt.

4/ Residual debt-creating flows and large negative gross external financing need arise because of the large and systematically negative errors and omissions in the historical data of the balance of payment. Both the residual and gross external financing need remain substantial in projections reflecting the 'Other investment' item of the balance of payment. The latter helps address the issue of error and omissions in the projection period, but is not accounted for in this table. 3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections it also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.

5/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.

6/  Defined as grants, concessional loans, and debt relief.

7/  Grant-equivalent financing includes grants provided directly to the government and through new borrowing (difference between the face value and the PV of new debt).

8/ Assumes that PV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.

9/ Historical averages are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability, whereas projections averages are over the first year of projection and the next 10 years.

10/ Exceptional financing includes debt relief for the first 6-month tranche and the next 18 months. The next 18 months of debt service relief is expected subject to availability of CCRT resources.

0


<!-- image -->

Rate of Debt Accumulation

Grant-equivalent financing (% of GDP)

Grant element of new borrowing (% right scale)

External debt (nominal) 1/ of which: Private

<!-- image -->

Table 2. Djibouti: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2017-2040

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Coverage of debt: The central, state, and local governments, government-guaranteed debt. Definition of external debt is Residency-based.

2/ The underlying PV of external debt-to-GDP ratio under the public DSA differs from the external DSA with the size of differences depending on exchange rates projections.

3/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term, and short-term debt.

4/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period and other debt creating/reducing flows.

5/ Defined as a primary deficit minus a change in the public debt-to-GDP ratio ((-): a primary surplus), which would stabilizes the debt ratio only in the year in question.

6/ Historical averages are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability, whereas projections averages are over the first year of projection and the next 10 years.

7/ Debt relief considered under CCRT recorded in the table.


Public sector debt 1/

of which: local-currency denominated of which: foreign-currency denominated

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Table 3. Djibouti: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2020-2030

(In percent)


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Variables include real GDP growth, GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.

2/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.

Table 4. Djibouti: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt, 2020-2030 (In percent)


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Variables include real GDP growth, GDP deflator and primary deficit in percent of GDP.

2/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.