## Annex I. Debt Sustainability Analysis Update 1


Rwanda's public debt is sustainable and remains at a low risk of external and overall debt distress. The DSA covers the central government as well as guarantees and debt held by all state-owned enterprises. This DSA is based on the baseline of the most recent DSA, published in July 2019, which will be updated in the next full DSA. A customized stress test to the most recent DSA is introduced to approximate the impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Rwanda's economy. 2  In this scenario, main macro variables such as real GDP growth and the primary balance in percent of GDP are shocked by -2.6 and -3.2 percentage points in 2020, respectively, compared to the baseline in the previous DSA. Exports are shocked by a significantly larger magnitude of -9.7 percentage points, to reflect lower receipts from tourism and goods exports due to weakening global demand. This produces a one-off breach to the PV of debt-to-exports ratio in 2020. All other external and public debt burden indicators remain under their respective thresholds under the baseline and stress tests, except for one-off breaches in the external debt service indicators in 2023 when the Eurobond issued in 2013 matures. These single one-year breaches are automatically discounted from the analysis according to the LIC-DSF guidance note. The current macroeconomic framework reflects currently available information. However, updates with respect to the economic impact and policy response to the COVID-19 crisis are rapidly evolving and risks are heavily tilted to the downside.

1  Based on the previous DSA in the Staff Report for the 2019 Article IV Consultation and Request for a Three-Year Policy Coordination Instrument (Country Report No. 19/211).

2  The COVID-19 Pandemic scenario is based on the projection described in the Staff Report, while other scenarios, including the baseline in this Annex, are based on the previous DSA.

## Annex Figure 1. Rwanda: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt Under Alternatives Scenarios, 2019 -29  1/ 2/

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Baseline

Historical scenario

COVID-19 Pandemic 3/

<!-- image -->

Note: "Yes" indicates any change to the size or interactions of the default settings for the stress tests. "n.a." indicates that the stress test does not apply.

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in or before 2029. Stress tests with one-off breaches are also presented (if any), while these oneoff breaches are deemed away for mechanical signals. When a stress test with a one-off breach happens to be the most exterme shock even after disregarding the oneoff breach, only that stress test (with a one-off breach) would be presented.

2/ The magnitude of shocks used for the commodity price shock stress test are based on the commodity prices outlook prepared by the IMF research department.

3/ COVID-19 Pandemic scenario is the customized shocks approximating the stress event and their impact captured in the Staff Report, while other scenarios are based on the baseline in the previous DSA (Country Report No. 19/211).

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Most extreme shock 1/

Threshold

Stress test with (the largest) one-off breach


* Note: All the additional financing needs generated by the shocks under the stress tests are assumed to be covered by PPG external MLT debt in the external DSA. Default terms of marginal debt are based on baseline 10-year projections.


<!-- image -->

Annex Table 1. Rwanda: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2016-39 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.

2/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.

- 3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.

4/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.

5/  Defined as grants, concessional loans, and debt relief.

6/  Grant-equivalent financing includes grants provided directly to the government and through new borrowing (difference between the face value and the PV of new debt).

7/ Assumes that PV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.

- 8/ Historical averages are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability, whereas projections averages are over the first year of projection and the next 10 years.

0


<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Annex Table 2. Rwanda: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2016-39

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Coverage of debt: The central government plus social security and extra budgetary funds, central bank, government-guaranteed debt, non-guaranteed SOE debt. Definition of external debt is Currency-based.

2/ The underlying PV of external debt-to-GDP ratio under the public DSA differs from the external DSA with the size of differences depending on exchange rates projections.

3/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term, and short-term debt.

4/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period and other debt creating/reducing flows.

5/ Defined as a primary deficit minus a change in the public debt-to-GDP ratio ((-): a primary surplus), which would stabilizes the debt ratio only in the year in question.

6/ Historical averages are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability, whereas projections averages are over the first year of projection and the next 10 years.

Definition of external/domestic debt

Is there a material difference between the two criteria?

Currency- based

No

Public sector debt 1/

of which: local-currency denominated of which: foreign-currency denominated

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Annex Table 3. Rwanda: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2019-29

(In percent)


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Variables include real GDP growth, GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.

2/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.

3/ COVID-19 Pandemic scenario is the customized shocks approximating the stress event and their impact captured in the Staff Report, while other scenarios are based on the baseline in the previous DSA (Country Report No. 19/211).

Annex Table 4. Rwanda: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt, 2019 -29 (In percent)


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Variables include real GDP growth, GDP deflator and primary deficit in percent of GDP.

2/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.

3/ COVID-19 Pandemic scenario is the customized shocks approximating the stress event and their impact captured in the Staff Report, while other scenarios are based on the baseline in the previous DSA (Country Report No. 19/211).