<!-- image -->

May 26, 2020

## SOLOMON ISLANDS

REQUESTS FOR PURCHASE UNDER THE RAPID FINANCING INSTRUMENT AND DISBURSEMENT UNDER THE RAPID CREDIT FACILITY -DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS

## Approved By

Jonathan D. Ostry and Johannes Wiegand (IMF) and Marcelo Estevão (IDA)

Prepared by the staff of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the International Development Association (IDA) 1/2/

The updated DSA after the COVID-19 shock suggests Solomon Islands remains at moderate risk of debt distress for both the external and overall public debt. All external debt indicators remain below the relevant indicative thresholds under the baseline scenario but breach thresholds under the extreme stress test scenario (combination shock for the PV of debt-to-GDP and export shock for the PV of debt-to-export and the debt services to export ratio). The PV of public debt-to-GDP ratio remains below the 55 percent benchmark under the baseline scenario, and it would remain below the benchmark under the most extreme shock (real GDP growth) till 2030. A tailored natural disaster shock of similar scale to the largest shock in Solomon Islands' history would cause a spike in debt trajectory in the aftermath of the event. While the DSA suggests there is substantial space to absorb shocks, Solomon Islands often faces fiscal liquidity challenges due to weak public financial management and the cash balance is currently low. Going forward, stronger revenue mobilization measures and expenditure rationalization are needed to rebuild fiscal buffers and to enhance resilience against shocks.



## Table 1. Solomon Islands: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario,  2016-2039

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.

2/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g) + Ɛα (1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms, Ɛ=nominal appreciation of the local currency, and α= share of local currency-denominated external debt in total external debt.

3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.

4/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.

5/  Defined as grants, concessional loans, and debt relief.

6/  Grant-equivalent financing includes grants provided directly to the government and through new borrowing (difference between the face value and the PV of new debt).

7/ Assumes that PV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.

8/ Historical averages are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability, whereas projections averages are over the first year of projection and the next 10 years.

0


<!-- image -->

External debt (nominal) 1/ of which: Private

<!-- image -->

4

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->


<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Natural Disaster shock


* Note: The public DSA allows for domestic financing to cover the additional financing needs generated by the shocks under the stress tests in the public DSA. Default terms of marginal debt are based on baseline 10-year projections.

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in or before 2029. The stress test with a one-off breach is also presented (if any), while the one-off breach is deemed away for mechanical signals. When a stress test with a one-off breach happens to be the most exterme shock even after disregarding the one-off breach, only that stress test (with a one-off breach) would be presented.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ A bold value indicates a breach of the threshold.

2/ Variables include real GDP growth, GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.

3/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
