<!-- image -->

April 29, 2020

## NEPAL

## REQUEST FOR DISBURSEMENT UNDER THE RAPID CREDIT FACILITY-DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS

Approved By Anne-Marie Gulde Wolfe and Maria Gonzalez (IMF) and Marcello Estevão (IDA)

Prepared by the staff of the International Monetary Fund and the International Development Association.


## NEPAL

This DSA updates the joint World Bank-Fund analysis of February 2020 to reflect Nepal's recent economic development, which have been considerably affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and related containment policies. Even under the COVID-19 pandemic, Nepal's debt is assessed to remain at a low risk of external and overall debt distress, unchanged from the 2020 DSA 4 . None of the debt and debt service indicators breach the indicative threshold values. However, given elevated gross financing needs in Nepal, a deeper global slowdown could negatively affect Nepal's risk of debt distress. The Nepalese authorities should continue to: (i) improve domestic productivity; (ii) streamline bureaucratic processes; (iii) compile PPP projects and private sector external debt; (iv) implement a medium-term debt strategy and develop the government bond market; and (v) improve subnational governments' public financial management and reporting, and implement a prudent framework for subnational borrowing.

4  IMF Country Report No 20/96, April 2020


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.

2/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.

3/ Includes exceptional financing (ie. changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.

The residuals in this table are mainly related to reserve drawdown and net errors and omissions. For example, there were reserve drawdown of 4.2% of GDP and positive net E&amp;Os of 2.7% of GDP in FY2018/19.

4/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.

5/  Defined as grants, concessional loans, and debt relief.

6/  Grant-equivalent financing includes grants provided directly to the government and through new borrowing (difference between the face value and the PV of new debt).

7/ Assumes that PV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.

8/ Historical averages are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability, whereas projections averages are over the first year of projection and the next 10 years.

9/ Fiscal year. For example, year 2019 means FY2018/19 (mid-July 2018 to mid-July 2019).


<!-- image -->

Debt Accumulation

Grant-equivalent financing (% of GDP)

Grant element of new borrowing (% right scale)

External debt (nominal) 1/ of which: Private

<!-- image -->

4

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Coverage of debt: The central, state, and local governments plus extra budgetary funds, central bank, government-guaranteed debt, non-guaranteed SOE debt . Definition of external debt is Currency-based.

2/ The underlying PV of external debt-to-GDP ratio under the public DSA differs from the external DSA with the size of differences depending on exchange rates projections.

3/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term, and short-term debt.

4/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period and other debt creating/reducing flows.

5/ Defined as a primary deficit minus a change in the public debt-to-GDP ratio ((-): a primary surplus), which would stabilizes the debt ratio only in the year in question.

6/ Historical averages are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability, whereas projections averages are over the first year of projection and the next 10 years.

7/ The residuals in this table are mainly related to net acquisition of financial assets. For example, the projection of net acquisition of financial assets in FY2019/20 is 1.6% of GDP.

8/ Fiscal year. For example, year 2019 means FY2018/19 (mid-July 2018 to mid-July 2019).

<!-- image -->

Figure 2. Nepal: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2020-2030

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->


* Note: The public DSA allows for domestic financing to cover the additional financing needs generated by the shocks under the stress tests in the public DSA. Default terms of marginal debt are based on baseline 10-year projections.

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in or before 2030. The stress test with a one-off breach is also presented (if any), while the one-off breach is deemed away for mechanical signals. When a stress test with a one-off breach happens to be the most exterme shock even after disregarding the one-off breach, only that stress test (with a one-off breach) would be presented.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->


## NEPAL
