<!-- image -->

June 1, 2020

## PAPUA NEW GUINEA

## REQUEST FOR DISBURSEMENT UNDER THE RAPID CREDIT FACILITY-DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS

Approved By Jonathan D. Ostry and Johannes Wiegand (IMF); and Marcello Estevão (IDA)

Prepared by the staffs of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the International Development Association (IDA) 1 2


External and overall debt are at high risk of debt distress. The shocks from COVID-19 pandemic, including the terms-of-trade shocks to the main exports (for instance, LNG and metals) are expected to reduce the current account surplus and exacerbate fiscal deficits resulting in a higher debt path compared to the 2019 Article IV DSA. However, the public debt is assessed to be on a sustainable path, conditional on the implementation of prudent fiscal policies following the commitments of the staffmonitored program.

The COVID-19 pandemic crisis is expected to heavily affect the prices of main exports, including LNG (-30.4%) and copper (-17%). Combined with weak external demands, the country is expected to experience a current account surplus reduction equivalent to 8.6 percent of GDP and larger fiscal deficits. The baseline scenario assumes that concessional loans from multilateral institutions and bilateral official creditors will help cover some of the health costs and financing needs triggered by the global health crisis. However, debt sustainability is subject to considerable downside risks, including from a more severe or prolonged impact of the COVID-19 shock.

The present value (PV) of public debt-to-GDP ratio remains high at over 40 percent, as fiscal deficits continue over the medium term on top of the elevated level of outstanding local debt. The PV of public and publicly-guaranteed (PPG) external debt-to-GDP ratio does not breach the threshold under the baseline scenario, but debt service-to-revenue ratio shows two short-lived breaches in 2020 and 2028, as bullet payments for private creditors and bond payments are due. The country is particularly vulnerable to export growth shocks under alternative scenario.

However, they are both projected to gradually decline as the forecast horizon advances. The PV of the public debt-to-GDP falls below 45 percent from 2024 and onwards. The first breach of the external debt service-to-revenue ratio is expected to be refinanced by other loans with concessional terms, but it is not certain to eliminate roll-over risks given the reduced external financing forecasts and a larger financing gap in 2020.  Baseline projections also assume the authorities' continued efforts to boost revenue mobilization, including by achieving the structural benchmark of the staffmonitored program on medium-term revenue strategy (MTRS). Based on overall debt dynamics and policy perspectives, PPG external and public debts are deemed sustainable going forward.

Figure 1. Papua New Guinea: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2020-2030

<!-- image -->

Debt service-to-exports ratio

<!-- image -->

PV of debt-to-exports ratio

Debt service-to-revenue ratio

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Note: "Yes" indicates any change to the size or interactions of the default settings for the stress tests. "n.a." indicates that the stress test does not apply.

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in or before 2030. The stress test with a one-off breach is also presented (if any), while the one-off breach is deemed away for mechanical signals. When a stress test with a one-off breach happens to be the most exterme shock even after disregarding the one-off breach, only that stress test (with a one-off breach) would be presented.

2/ The magnitude of shocks used for the commodity price shock stress test are based on the commodity prices outlook prepared by the IMF research department.

<!-- image -->

* Note: All the additional financing needs generated by the shocks under the stress tests are assumed to be covered by PPG external MLT debt in the external DSA. Default terms of marginal debt are based on baseline 10-year projections.

Figure 2. Papua New Guinea: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2020-2030

<!-- image -->


* Note: The public DSA allows for domestic financing to cover the additional financing needs generated by the shocks under the stress tests in the public DSA. Default terms of marginal debt are based on baseline 10-year projections.

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in or before 2030. The stress test with a one-off breach is also presented (if any), while the one-off breach is deemed away for mechanical signals. When a stress test with a one-off breach happens to be the most exterme shock even after disregarding the one-off breach, only that stress test (with a one-off breach) would be presented.

Table 1. Papua New Guinea: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2017-2040 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

6

## Table 2. Papua New Guinea: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2017-2040 (In percent of GDP unless otherwise indicated)


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Coverage of debt: The central, state, and local governments, government-guaranteed debt . Definition of external debt is Residency-based.

- 2/ The underlying PV of external debt-to-GDP ratio under the public DSA differs from the external DSA with the size of differences depending on exchange rates projections.

3/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term, and short-term debt.

4/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period and other debt creating/reducing flows.

5/ Defined as a primary deficit minus a change in the public debt-to-GDP ratio ((-): a primary surplus), which would stabilizes the debt ratio only in the year in question.

- 6/ Historical averages are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability, whereas projections averages are over the first year of projection and the next 10 years.

Definition of external/domestic debt

Is there a material difference between the two criteria?

Public sector debt 1/

of which: local-currency denominated of which: foreign-currency denominated

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Residency- based

No



<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->