## Annex I. Joint Bank-Fund Debt Sustainability Analysis 1

Risks of external debt distress and overall risk of debt distress are both assessed as moderate with limited space to absorb shocks, which is unchanged relative to the previous DSA of February 2020. The baseline scenario assumes that the government adopts a multi-year fiscal consolidation plan with permanent measures of at least 3 percent of GDP and unwinds the temporary programs implemented in response to COVID-19. The reduction in the fiscal deficit over 2021-23 equals 3.6 percent of GDP that allows to lower the debt level over those years. Under the baseline scenario, external debt burden indicators, remain below the threshold. However, the present value (PV) of public and publicly guaranteed (PPG) external debt-to-GDP ratio breaches over an extended period under the most extreme shock scenario and contingent liability tailored shock which is related to the external cooperation with Venezuela. The overall risk of public debt distress is also assessed as moderate. The PV of public debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to be below the threshold under the baseline scenario, but it is projected to surpass the threshold under the most extreme shock scenario, notably lower GDP growth, and realization of contingent liability shock. Were external financing envisaged under the baseline not to materialize in the near and/or medium term, the authorities would be prepared to implement contingency measures to ensure debt sustainability.


<!-- image -->

Figure AI.2. Nicaragua: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2020-30

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio

<!-- image -->

1

Contingent liability scenario


* Note: The public DSA allows for domestic financing to cover the additional financing needs generated by the shocks under the stress tests in the public DSA. Default terms of marginal debt are based on baseline 10-year projections.

Sources: National authorities and IMF staff calculations.

1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in or before 2030. The stress test with a one-off breach is also presented (if any), while the one-off breach is deemed away for mechanical signals. When a stress test with a one-off breach happens to be the most exterme shock even after disregarding the one-off breach, only that stress test (with a one-off breach) would be presented.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Table AI.1. Nicaragua: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2017-40

(In Percent of GDP, unless otherwise specified)


Sources: National authorities and IMF staff calculations.

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.

2/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g) + Ɛα (1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms, Ɛ=nominal appreciation of the local currency, and α= share of local currency-denominated external debt in total external debt.

3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.

4/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.

5/  Defined as grants, concessional loans, and debt relief.

6/  Grant-equivalent financing includes grants provided directly to the government and through new borrowing (difference between the face value and the PV of new debt).

7/ Assumes that PV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.

8/ Historical averages are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability, whereas projections averages are over the first year of projection and the next 10 years.

0


<!-- image -->

Rate of Debt Accumulation

Grant-equivalent financing (% of GDP)

Grant element of new borrowing (% right scale)

<!-- image -->

## Table AI.2. Nicaragua: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2017-40 (In Percent of GDP, unless otherwise specified)


Sources: National authorities and IMF staff calculations.

1/ Coverage of debt: The central government plus social security, central bank, government-guaranteed debt. Definition of external debt is Residency-based.

2/ The underlying PV of external debt-to-GDP ratio under the public DSA differs from the external DSA with the size of differences depending on exchange rates projections.

3/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term, and short-term debt.

4/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period and other debt creating/reducing flows.

5/ Defined as a primary deficit minus a change in the public debt-to-GDP ratio ((-): a primary surplus), which would stabilizes the debt ratio only in the year in question.

6/ Historical averages are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability, whereas projections averages are over the first year of projection and the next 10 years.

Definition of external/domestic debt

Is there a material difference between the two criteria?

Residency- based

Yes

Public sector debt 1/

of which: local-currency denominated of which: foreign-currency denominated

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Table AI.3. Nicaragua: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2020-30

(In Percent)


Sources: National authorities and IMF staff calculations.

1/ A bold value indicates a breach of the threshold.

2/ Variables include real GDP growth, GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.

3/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.

Table AI.4. Nicaragua: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt, 2020-30


Sources: National authorities and IMF staff calculations.

1/ A bold value indicates a breach of the threshold.

2/ Variables include real GDP growth, GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.

3/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.