<!-- image -->

October 12, 2012 November 20, 2013

## TOGO

## STAFF REPORT FOR THE 2013 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION-DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS

Approved By Michael Atingi-Ego and Peter Allum (IMF) and Jeffrey Lewis and Marcelo Giugale (IDA)

The Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) has been prepared jointly by the staffs of the International Monetary Fund and the International Development Association, using the debt sustainability framework for low-income countries approved by the Boards of both institutions.

The analysis based on the joint IMF-World Bank debt sustainability framework for low-income countries shows that Togo remains at moderate risk of debt distress. After full HIPC assistance, MDRI and beyond HIPC assistance, Togo's external and public debt indicators improved significantly in 2010/11, and remained stable under the previous ECF-supported program. In 2012, Togo contracted significant external debt. While debt indicators are projected to remain below the policy-relevant indicative thresholds in the 20-year period under the baseline scenario, Togo remains vulnerable to certain shocks and could breach the policy-relevant thresholds for the PV of debt-to-GDP, PV of debt-to-exports, PV of debt-to-revenue and debt service-to-revenue ratios under some alternative scenarios in the outer years.

TOGO

## INTRODUCTION

## 1. The last joint DSA for Togo was prepared in November 2010 and updated in August 2011, and both concluded that Togo was at moderate risk of debt distress. This debt sustainability analysis

(LIC-DSA) for Togo assesses its external and public debt using the forward-looking debt sustainability framework (DSF) for low-income countries. 1 The outcome of this analysis was in line with the previous DSAs. Togo reached the completion point of the HIPC Initiative in December 2010 and was granted debt relief from several multilateral and bilateral creditors.

The nominal total debt stock, which fell from US$2.5 billion at end-2009 to below US$1.5 billion at end-2010, was US$1.9 billion at end-2012.

## 2. In the LIC-DSA framework, the present value of Togo's public and publicly guaranteed (PPG) external debt is US$724 million at end-

2012. Around 45 percent of this stock of debt is owed to multilateral creditors and the remainder to bilateral and commercial creditors of which around 28 percent is owed to non-Paris Club bilateral creditors (Text Table 1). Non-Paris Club debt has increased almost by five percentage points of GDP since 2010. Concurrently, domestic debt decreased from 30 percent in 2010 to 27 percent of GDP in 2012.

## BASELINE ASSUMPTIONS

## 3. The baseline macroeconomic assumptions for the present DSA are the following:

- a. Real GDP growth is projected to be 5.6 percent in 2013 and average about 5.9 percent over 201418, driven by public and private investments in key sectors including agriculture, mining industry and infrastructure (especially in transport). The estimated potential growth rate exceeds historical rates, which were depressed by the dislocations caused by the protracted social, political, and

1 This DSA has been prepared by Fund staff using the Debt Sustainability Framework (DSF) for Low Income Countries (see 'Applying the Debt Sustainability Framework for Low-Income Countries Post Debt Relief',

(http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTDEBTDEPT/PolicyPapers/21154573/DMSDR1S3149398v1DSFPape rforweb.pdf). Togo's quality of policies and institutions, as measured by the average World Bank's Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) for the period 2010-12 (2.95), places it as a 'weak performer'. The corresponding indicative thresholds for the external debt indicators are 30 percent for the NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio, 100 percent of the debt-to-export ratio, 200 percent for NPV of debt-torevenue ratio, 15 percent for the debt service-to-exports ratio, and 18 percent for the debt service-torevenue ratio.


Source: Country authorities and Staff calculations

economic crisis that the country experienced up to the mid-2000s.The main downside risks to growth projections are related to the country's weak management capacity. These may deter the implementation of the planned public investments, which would be one of the main drivers of growth over the medium term. Additionally, while in the short run, public and private investments in key sectors rely on electricity generated by their own resources, the supply of electricity remains a binding constraint in the medium and long run,

- b. Public investment is projected to accelerate starting in 2013, reaching 10.4 percent of GDP in 2013 and 10.9 percent in 2014 and retain this upward trend until 2017, slightly slowing down in 2018. Upon completion of the planned investments, it is expected to stabilize around 9.5 percent. About 35 percent of public investments will be financed domestically while the remaining 65 percent will be via external financing. Public investment projects are expected to be mostly directed to infrastructure and will lead GDP growth to increase above its long-term trend for these years. Togo has weak public investment management capacity as documented by the IMF's 2013 Public Investment Management Index (PIMI). 2
- c. The projections for key commodity prices (oil, cotton, cocoa, and coffee) through 2018 are based on WEO projections of August 2013 and are assumed constant in real terms afterwards.
- d. Inflation over the long-term is projected to remain stable at around 2.5 percent, reflecting sound monetary policy at the regional level.
- e. The current account deficit is expected to remain at levels above 10 percent, after a slight improvement in 2013 from 11.8 percent in 2012 to about 10.6 percent. The underlying reason for high projections of the deficit in the first projection years is higher levels of capital imports needed for the planned public and private investments. From 2016 onwards, the current account balances are projected to improve and would fluctuate around 7 percent over the long run.
- f. The domestic primary fiscal balance is projected to return to positive territory and remain above 1 percent in the projection period, thereby providing a fiscal anchor to create the fiscal room to generate reductions in the debt-to-GDP stock and thereby ensuring fiscal sustainability over the long term. 3
- g. The overall balance is expected to improve by 2 percentage points of GDP to a deficit of 3 percent by 2017 and to gradually decline to around 2 percent, reflecting lower infrastructure investment needs in the medium to long term.

2 Togo received a rating of 0.92 in the IMF's Public Investment Management Index on a scale from 0 to 4 Togo's rating is lower than those of its WAEMU peers (Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote d'Ivoire, Mali and Senegal).

3 The domestic primary fiscal balance is the authorities' primary tool for short term fiscal policy, given interest payments and multi-year infrastructure investment plans.

3

- h. FDI flows are expected to increase over the medium-term reflecting improvements in the investment climate and overall governance as the SCAPE program is expected to address these areas. However, given Togo's weak track record in governance, these flows, as well as grants, are subject to significant risks, and this may hinder Togo's concessional financing. FDI is expected to increase from 1.7 percent of GDP in 2012 to 2.5 percent of GDP by 2018, as a result of public and private investments, better infrastructure and improved investment climate.
- i. Initially, external financing will be mostly on grant terms, with less concessional financing gradually picking up, leading to a decrease in the grant element of new financing (as shown in Figure 1). The sources of concessional external financing are expected to consist of Togo's traditional multilateral donors, as well as the recently-increased financing from non-Paris Club creditors (especially China and India). Since the completion of the previous ECF program in 2011, Togo's creditor profile changed somewhat. As of end-2012, the loans from non-Paris Club (NPC) creditors constituted about 28 percent of total debt stock compared to 24 percent at end-2011. External borrowing by state-owned enterprises totaled 15 percent of total debt stock in 2012.
- j. The DSA is based on the new unified discount rate of five percent. 4

## EXTERNAL DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS

## Baseline

4. Under the baseline scenario, Togo's external debt indicators remain below their relevant indicative policy relevant thresholds (Table 1a, Figure 1). The present value (PV) of public and publicly guaranteed (PPG) debt equals to 20.4 percent of GDP in 2013 and remains below the 30 percent threshold until the end of the projected period. Furthermore, both the PV of external debt relative to revenues and exports stay relatively stable and below their respective indicative threshold until 2033. The share of concessional loans in new financing is projected to decline, which results in the concessionality of new loans to decrease from nearly 50 percent to around 18 percent over the period 2013 to 2033. The rate of debt accumulation is projected to stabilize around 1.5 percent per annum in the long run. 5,6

## Alternative Scenarios and Stress Tests

4 On October 11, 2013, the Executive Boards of the IMF and the World Bank approved the reform of the discount rates presented in SM/12/271, resulting in a unique, unified 5 percent rate to be applied both to DSAs and to the calculation of the grant element (Board Decision N. 15462-(13-97)).

5 The residual for endogenous debt dynamics presented in Table 1a is largely due to exceptional financing, price and exchange rate changes, and debt flow relief. For the period 2013-17, the ECF financing has also been taken into account, as well as other identified donor financing.

6 The accumulation of nominal external debt as a percentage of GDP throughout the projection period is largely driven by project loans (remaining around 2.5-3 percent of GDP), which can be attributed to Togo's long-term investment needs.

5. Togo's external debt outlook remains vulnerable to shocks especially toward the end of the projection period (Table 1b, Figure 1). The policy thresholds for four key ratios are breached under the most extreme stress tests. First, the PV of external debt to GDP' indicators deteriorate under the terms shock scenario in which new loans are obtained on less favorable terms. In this case, the threshold is breached in 2023. Secondly, the PV of debt-to-exports ratio surpasses the indicative threshold in 2033 under the terms shock scenario. The PV of debt-to-revenue ratio breaches the 200 percent threshold in 2029 under the same scenario. Lastly, the PV of debt service-to-revenue ratio surpasses the indicative thresholds in 2026 under the one-time 30 percent nominal depreciation shock.
6. In light of the results from the baseline and alternative scenarios as well as the stress tests, staff concludes that Togo still is at moderate risk of debt distress.

## PUBLIC SECTOR DEBT SUSTAINABILITY

## Baseline

7. The inclusion of Togo's domestic public debt in the analysis emphasizes the vulnerability of the baseline scenario (Table 2a, Figure 2). Togo's domestic debt burden reflects years of weak fiscal management and domestic arrears accumulation, as well as the need to recapitalize ailing banks. Much of the debt burden stemmed from the government's recognition of liabilities arising from liquidated lossmaking SOEs. Under the baseline scenario, the PV of total public debt ratios are projected to decrease over the projection period. On average, the PV of debt to GDP ratio amounts to around 23 percent over 20132033. For debt ratios to remain at a reasonable level over the long-run, both an improvement in the macroeconomic outlook and a more cautious debt strategy are critical factors.

## Alternative Scenarios and Stress Tests

8. The evolution of the debt indicators would be highly sensitive to growth shocks, which would increase the debt level and debt service over the long run . Total public debt dynamics are particularly vulnerable to a growth shock (Table 2b, Figure 2). This highlights the importance of a reform agenda that improves the business environment to support public and foreign investment for growth.

## CONCLUSION

9. The DSA indicates that Togo is at moderate risk of debt distress, though is susceptible to macroeconomic developments and any changes in its debt management strategy and capacity. The authorities generally agreed with the assessment while considering staff's long-term growth projections to be conservative. Under the baseline scenario, the debt ratios remain below the thresholds for the projected period, but under alternative scenarios thresholds would be breached in the outer years. These dynamics highlight the vulnerability of the Togolese economy to certain shocks (in particular less favorable terms on new financing), and stress the need for a prudent approach to new borrowing. This also pronounces the importance of improving debt management capacity in Togo to have a realistic and overall assessment of

the risks posed by various sectors including fiscal. While heavy public investment is expected to lead to sustained growth, Togo's weak public investment management capacity may impose risks on the underlying public investment-growth nexus. Additionally, public investments based on a public-private partnership framework would imply a higher risk of potential fiscal liabilities.

## 10. Maintaining a robust external debt outlook will depend on a sustained pick-up of real GDP growth, and foreign direct investment, as well as prudent debt management and solid fiscal

performance. The inclusion of Togo's domestic debt in the analysis reinforces the conclusions of the external DSA and stresses the risks to Togo's debt prospects. In this context, it is essential that the Togolese authorities ensure efforts to strengthen public finance management and debt management, restructure the banking system and promote financial development, reform state-owned enterprises, and improve the investment climate, hence laying the foundation for accelerating growth prospects.

<!-- image -->

8

<!-- image -->


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections. €

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.

2/ Derived as [r - g ρ (1+g)]/(1+g+ ρ +g ρ ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.

3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.

4/ Assumes that PV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.

5/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.

6/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

7/ Defined as grants, concessional loans, and debt relief.

8/ Grant-equivalent financing includes grants provided directly to the government and through new borrowing (difference between the face value and the PV of new debt).

9/ Budget support

9




Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Central Government.

2/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period.

3/ Revenues excluding grants.

4/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term debt.

5/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.


13