<!-- image -->

February 2, 2024

## DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF TIMOR-LESTE

## STAFF REPORT FOR THE 2023 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATIONDEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS

Approved By Ranil Salgado (IMF), Fabian Bornhorst (IMF), Lalita Moorty (IDA), and Manuela Francisco (IDA)

Prepared by Staff of the International Monetary Fund and the International Development Association


Timor-Leste remains at moderate risk of overall and external debt distress, with application of judgement, unchanged from the 2022 Article IV debt sustainability analysis. The present value of the external debt-to-exports ratio and the debt service-to-exports ratio under the baseline are projected to breach their respective indicative thresholds in the medium term, triggering a mechanical rating of high risk of overall and external debt distress. In the medium term, however, the Petroleum Fund is large relative to projected debt levels and debt service requirements, and its assets are liquid and accessible, thus acting as a mitigating factor, prompting the use of judgement to upgrade the risk assessment. Long-term risks to debt sustainability have moderated compared to the 2022 Article IV debt sustainability analysis, with smaller fiscal deficits in 2023-25 delaying the depletion of the Petroleum Fund. Staff now projects that the Petroleum Fund, which is the main source of funding of fiscal deficits, will be depleted in 2039, triggering a breach of all debt indicators towards the end of the twenty-year projection horizon. However, there is time to adopt necessary policy adjustments-staff's alternative scenario illustrates how fiscal consolidation and structural reforms can ensure both fiscal and debt sustainability in the long term.

## PUBLIC DEBT COVERAGE

## 1. The coverage of public sector debt used in this report is public and publicly

guaranteed debt. Timor-Leste's public and publicly guaranteed external debt is held entirely by the central government. The coverage of public sector debt includes state-owned enterprise debt. Under the Public Debt Regime Law, state-owned enterprises are not allowed to borrow for themselves and can only obtain financing via on-lending from the Ministry of Finance. 1  Currently, there are no guarantees granted by the state to state-owned enterprises. The Social Security Fund does not issue debt on its own. The public sector only borrows externally, given a lack of domestic financing sources. The debt definition of the debt sustainability analysis is currency-based, and the legal tender is the U.S. dollar.

<!-- image -->


2. The contingent liability stress test settings were customized (Text Table 2). The default shock to contingent liabilities from state-owned enterprises debt and Public Private Partnerships is reduced to zero. This is because the former is already included in the baseline public debt, and the latter is negligible (see ¶1).

<!-- image -->


## BACKGROUND ON DEBT

## 3. Timor-Leste's net public asset position is currently strong due to oil-related savings accumulated in Petroleum Fund assets and low levels of public debt .

1 According to the Public Debt Regime Law No. 13/2011, the Government of Timor-Leste, in particular the Ministry of Finance, is the only entity that may engage in borrowing, motivated by financing needs generated by the need to execute the State's priority tasks relating to the building of strategic infrastructure for the country's development.

- The Petroleum Fund balance at end-2022 stood at $17.4 billion (1,039 percent of non-oil GDP), covering 187 months of prospective goods and services imports. The Petroleum Fund balance decreased by $2.4 billion in 2022 as unfavorable market revaluations ($-2.4 billion; -11.9 percent) and a large withdrawal ($1.4 billion; more than double the Fund's Estimated Sustainable Income) exceeded interest and dividend income ($596m) and oil revenues ($1.1 billion). 2  The average nominal return on Petroleum Fund assets during 2017-22 was 4.5  percent.
- The fiscal deficit increased from 45 percent of non-oil GDP in 2021 to 58 percent in 2022 due to significantly higher recurrent expenditure. Outstanding public external debt increased by $23

<!-- image -->

million and reached 15 percent of non-oil GDP ($258 million) in 2022. All external loans signed since 2012 have consisted of concessional loans from the Asian Development Bank, the World Bank Group, and the Japan International Cooperation Agency to finance mainly road infrastructure projects, water supply and sanitation, and development of the airport. The Asian Development Bank has the largest share of total external debt, comprising nearly 65 percent of total external debt at end-2022. The average

<!-- image -->

maturity of existing loans is 25.5 years, with grace periods ranging from 5 to 10 years. Debt service payments on existing debt average $20 million (close to 1.2 percent of non-oil GDP) per annum in the medium term and decline thereafter.

## BACKGROUND ON MACRO FORECASTS

4. Timor-Leste faces large and pressing development challenges . Despite notable socioeconomic achievements since gaining independence in 2002, Timor-Leste remains a fragile postconflict state with weak human and institutional capacity, large infrastructure gaps, and high dependence on revenues from the Petroleum Fund. GNI per capita in current USD was $1,970 in

2  The Petroleum Fund constitutes the main financing source for the budget. The Fund's estimated sustainable income (ESI) is set at 3 percent of total petroleum wealth (sum of the Petroleum Fund balance and the net present value of expected future petroleum revenue). The revenue rule-enshrined in the Petroleum Fund Law-limits the withdrawal for budget purpose from the Petroleum Fund up to the ESI. Withdrawals in excess of the ESI can be made with the approval of Parliament. The debt rule sets a ceiling on the cost of external borrowing at 3 percent and requires the government to benchmark the costs of external borrowing (external debt) with the Petroleum Fund's average rate of investment returns, subject to regular reviews to align with the Petroleum Fund's investment strategies.

2022, much lower than the threshold of at least $4,096 to be classified as an upper-middle income country. While the poverty rate (based on the national poverty line) declined from 50.4 percent in 2007 to 41.8 percent in 2014, it remains among the highest in the region.

## 5. This debt sustainability analysis is based on the macroeconomic projections underlying the 2023 Article IV consultation (Text Table 3). To illustrate the impact of different policy options on debt sustainability, two scenarios-baseline and reform-are considered.


Sources: Timor-Leste authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

1/ Oil sector activities are considered non-resident activities in balance of payments statistics.

2/ Closing balance.

3/ Simple average of UK Brent, Dubai, and WTI crude oil prices; October 2023 WEO assumptions.

## 6. Several macro-fiscal developments recently have improved significantly compared to

the 2022 Article IV debt sustainability analysis (Text Table 4) . The following revisions were made to reflect recent developments and the latest data. First, the Petroleum Fund's outstanding balance at end-2022 included a valuation of about $701 million (close to 4 percent of the Petroleum Fund balance) for the investment in the Greater Sunrise oil fields by Timor-Gap (the national oil company) financed by the Petroleum Fund, which had previously been written down to zero in the 2020 financial statement. 3  Second, the 2022 budget envisaged much larger fiscal deficit spending on an expanded envelope for capital expenditures, but these plans were abandoned in the new government's 2023 rectification budget. Finally, the courts blocked the transfer of $1 billion from the Petroleum Fund to finance support programs for war veterans through the new National Liberation Combatants Fund, which had been included in the baseline for the 2022 debt sustainability analysis.


## Macroeconomic Assumptions

- Real non-oil GDP growth is projected to slow from 4.0 percent in 2022 to 1.5 percent in 2023, weighed down by a strong contraction in public expenditure. Growth will recover to 3.5 percent in 2024 supported by the new government's prioritization of public capital expenditure in the budget. Growth is projected to hover around 3.0 percent in the medium and long term (20282043), driven by the private sector and broadly aligned with historical (non-oil) growth performance of 3.2 percent during 2010-19. Oil production from active fields ceased by end2023 and is not projected to restart in the baseline scenario. 4
- Inflation increased sharply to a peak of almost 10 percent y/y in 2022, mostly driven by food prices. While prices of non-food items have stabilized, food inflation remains high and has held back the moderation of headline inflation, which averaged 8.4 percent in 2023. With the easing of global commodity prices in recent months, inflation is expected to ease to 3.5 percent in 2024 and return to 2 percent in the medium term, in line with the previous debt sustainability analysis.

3 The audited financial statements for Timor-Gap in 2020 wrote down the investment in Greater Sunrise triggered by uncertainty of the fiscal and regulatory regime of the Greater Sunrise field. However, the position's valuation was restored in the 2021 Petroleum Fund account and is accounted for in this DSA.

4  Non-oil and oil GDP are equal from 2024 onwards. The baseline does not include the development of the Greater Sunrise fields as development plans are not yet approved.

- The fiscal deficit is projected to decrease from 58 percent of non-oil GDP in 2022 to 42 percent in 2023 and remain around that level until 2030. The projected deficits over 2023-25 are much smaller than what had been forecast in the previous DSA, which anticipated a peak deficit of 68 percent of non-oil GDP in 2023. Notably, the large increase in capital expenditures envisaged for 2023-25 in the 2022 budget has not materialized, and oil revenues in 2023 were much higher than expected. As envisaged in the  2024 budget, a modest rebound in expenditure is expected in 2024 that includes an expansion of

<!-- image -->

capital expenditure and contains spending on transfers. During 2025-27, the fiscal stance is projected to be mildly expansionary, reflecting the new government's plans to prioritize public spending on human and physical capital. The fiscal deficit is projected to remain around 40 percent over 2031-39, and to gradually decline thereafter, reaching 31 percent of GDP in 2043. Over 30 percent of public expenditure is expected to be allocated for government transfers in 2023, down from 52 percent in 2022, and this share is expected to decline modestly over the longer term as capital expenditures are prioritized.

- The current account deficit is expected to increase from 21 percent of non-oil GDP in 2023 to about 42 percent in 2024, increasing slightly to around 47 percent by 2030, reflecting the projected fiscal path, absence of oil revenues, strong imports of goods and services, and limited exports. The medium-term current account deficit is largely unchanged since the last DSA, but it has been revised up by 10 percentage points of non-oil GDP due to statistical revisions to the denominator. In the long term, the current account deficit gradually declines as the domestic production of tradeable goods expands. Remittances are assumed to grow in line with non-oil GDP.
- External financing consists of concessional loans from official creditors. Private external borrowing is assumed to remain negligible. Timor-Leste does not have exceptional financing such as accumulation of arrears. There is no domestic financing assumed in the baseline, though the new administration has expressed an interest in developing an issuance program for government bills in the local market.
- The grant element of loans is assumed to decline moderately in the medium term as the economy develops. Other assumptions include that no off-budget debt is accumulated including by state-owned enterprises in line with existing legislation.
7. The baseline fiscal scenario assumes lower spending than planned under the 2023 rectification budget and the 2024 budget, reflecting historical execution rates. Capital and recurrent spending in 2023 is assumed to be close to 90 percent of the planned amount in the 2023 rectification budget, which itself internalized substantial under-execution of the 2023 budget through August 2023. For 2024, an execution rate of about 85 percent is assumed out of the

planned amount in the 2024 budget. An annual nominal investment return on the Petroleum Fund of around 4.5 percent is assumed during 2023-30-in line with its average returns over 2017-22after which a smaller return of 4 percent is assumed to reflect a shift into more liquid investments as the Fund's balance falls.

- Government revenues (which include the Petroleum Fund's estimated sustainable income) are projected to decline from 46 percent of non-oil GDP in 2022 to about 39 percent in 2023 and average around 32 and 17 percent respectively during 2024-28 and 2029-43. In the baseline, there is a gradual erosion in the balance of the Petroleum Fund which in turn reduces its estimated sustainable income. The government has signaled its intention to raise domestic revenue from 10 percent currently to around 15 percent of non-oil GDP in the medium term. 5 While the baseline scenario assumes a moderate increase in domestic revenue over the long term, it envisages the ratio rising from 10 percent to only about 12 percent of non-oil GDP by 2043.
- Recurrent spending in the long term is projected to increase by 3.5 percent each year, broadly in line with projected population growth and inflation. Capital spending is projected to increase by around 8 percent during 2024-28 (and around 5 percent in the long term), up from 2 percent in the previous debt sustainability analysis to reflect the new government's prioritization of public investment and its much lower starting level following the abandonment of the 2022 budget's planned investment ramp-up.
- As the government relies on Petroleum Fund withdrawals to meet its financing needs, the Petroleum Fund falls to $13.6 billion by 2028. The fund is completely depleted by 2039-one year later than in the previous debt sustainability analysis-after which it is assumed that the government relies on external debt to finance fiscal deficits. 6
- External borrowing is projected at about 1.5 percent of non-oil GDP during 2023-28 in line with updated borrowing plans shared by the authorities and slightly below recent values. The average maturity and grace periods of the new external loans are broadly similar with existing loans, though the baseline incorporates access to IDA Shorter Maturity Loans (SMLs) during 2023-25. 7 Outstanding external debt as a share of non-oil GDP is projected to decline slightly from 15 percent in 2022 to 13.5 percent in 2028, reflecting growth of nominal non-oil GDP and the projected disbursement of external loans. However, once the Petroleum Fund depletes in 2039, external borrowing is assumed to be the main source of financing of the fiscal deficit, with the stock of external debt rising to around 180 percent of non-oil GDP by 2043 under the baseline.

5 The authorities are working on further upgrading their tax collection system, including moving to electronic tax services; however, the underlying law changes essential for the upgraded systems to be functional have not yet been undertaken. Draft laws for a value-added tax (VAT) and a new Tax Procedure Code were prepared some years ago. Submitting these to the Parliament in 2023 were the FY2023 Performance and Policy Actions (PPAs) established by the IDA in consultation with the Ministry of Finance. However, the authorities are currently unable to fulfill these agreed upon PPAs, resulting in a 10 percent set-aside of the IDA allocation for this fiscal year.

6 The Ministry of Finance projects higher levels of public expenditure than staff over the medium term, and thus expects the PF to be fully depleted by 2034.

7 For Timor-Leste, SMLs comprise approximately 24 percent of its IDA's country allocation. SMLs have a 12-year final maturity, a 6-year grace period, and zero interest or service charge.

<!-- image -->

## 8. While the baseline scenario is identified as potentially unrealistic, there are plausible

and relevant mitigating factors that suggest it does not warrant adjustments. The three-year primary balance adjustment (between 2022 and 2025) is projected to be 15 percent of non-oil GDP: this represents one of the ten largest adjustments in the distribution of Fund-supported programs in low-income countries since 1990. However, most of this consolidation already took place in 2023 reflecting low budget execution rates, particularly in public investment. As some of the unexecuted investment projects are expected to be delayed and resume next year, the fiscal stance will loosen somewhat in 2024, supporting growth. The contribution to growth from public investment, however, is expected to be lower than in the previous DSA, given the large downward revision to capital expenditures in the 2023 budget. The impact of the consolidation explains the downward revision to growth in 2023, but a relatively low multiplier of 0.1 is assumed. If the multiplier turns out to be larger, growth could be lower or negative in the short term.

Text Table 5. Macroeconomic Assumptions: Baseline and Reform Scenarios


Source: IMF staff estimates.

## 9. Under staff's reform scenario-which is broadly consistent with the scenario that has been previously presented in the 2021 and 2022 DSAs-policy actions are adopted to safeguard long-term fiscal sustainability.

- Domestic revenue mobilization : A VAT is adopted by 2024 to generate additional revenue of about 3 percent of GDP, raising domestic revenue to about 13 percent of non-oil GDP by 2025. Over the medium term, strengthening of tax compliance through tax administration reforms and further tax policy measures (e.g., revision of excise tax rates, increase in statutory income tax rate, adopting a property tax) further increase domestic revenue to about 15.5 percent of nonoil GDP. Along with these initiatives, structural reforms (¶11) are estimated to yield additional revenue growth of about 6 percent (annualized average) during 2024-43 relative to the baseline.
- Expenditure moderation: Government expenditure declines gradually to the 2019 level as a share of non-oil GDP, allowing for the elimination of excess withdrawals from the Petroleum Fund by 2033. The quality of government spending is improved by curbing growth in salary, goods, and services expenditures and allocating more spending towards human capital development and a strengthened social safety net. Capital expenditure is kept stable as a share of non-oil GDP-at higher levels than in the baseline scenario-and its growth dividend is boosted through rigorous cost-benefit analysis. 8
- A target to achieve a sustainable fiscal position by 2033: More moderate levels of spending coupled with higher domestic revenue gradually unwind fiscal imbalances and align withdrawals from the Petroleum Fund with its sustainable income. The strong fiscal outturns in 2023 mean that the path to fiscal sustainability in the reform scenario is more gradual than it was in the 2022 DSA, and thus allows for stronger short-term growth. The Petroleum Fund balance will gradually increase to close to $20 billion in the long run, and the estimated sustainable income will decline more slowly in percent of non-oil GDP. 9  Fiscal deficits over the medium-term (202528) would average 23 percent of non-oil GDP, instead of 44 percent of non-oil GDP under the baseline. Overall, in the reform scenario the Petroleum Fund is preserved from 2033 onwards and generates a permanent level of investment income to support government expenditures, thus putting fiscal and debt sustainability on a solid footing.

8  The revised Budgetary Framework and Public Financial Management Law, passed in February 2022 will help enhance the efficiency and quality of government spending. However, for it to be effective, a concrete action plan of PFM reforms with technical support from the Fund should be laid out and implemented swiftly with help from other development partners.

9 The dynamic of the Petroleum Fund is such that a lower Petroleum Fund balance will reduce the level of estimated sustainable income, resulting in higher excess withdrawals to close a given financing gap, highlighting the need to curb the rapid loss in Petroleum Fund wealth.

<!-- image -->

- The government's strategy of increasing public external borrowing via concessional loans to finance public investment in infrastructure projects and to preserve the Petroleum Fund wealth continues to hold. Overall, external borrowing is significantly lower in 2038-43 as the Petroleum Fund is preserved and public spending increases in line with higher sustainable sources of revenue.

10. At the same time, structural reforms are implemented to improve the business environment, raise productivity, and promote private sector development. 10 These include progress in facilitating the ease of doing business, shifting from subsistence to commercial agriculture, addressing digital infrastructure and connectivity bottlenecks, increasing financial access, building human capacity, closing labor skill gaps, and strengthening the justice system to improve governance and reduce corruption vulnerabilities. The authorities laid out medium-term measures in the Economic Recovery Plan 2020-23, focusing on the abovementioned priorities, to address preexisting structural weaknesses for long-term growth.

10 Staff estimates suggest the external sector position in 2023 was substantially weaker than implied by medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings.

## 11. The macro-fiscal outlook is significantly stronger under the reform scenario:

- Real non-oil GDP is somewhat lower than in the baseline in the short run owing to the output costs of fiscal consolidation. 11  However, these are mitigated by the positive impact of reprioritization (towards growthenhancing sectors such as health, education, agriculture, tourism, digitalization), by the improvement in the quality of public spending, and by structural reforms to promote the

<!-- image -->

expansion of the private sector. 12  With sustained improvement in productivity and competitiveness, the economic impact of structural reforms is higher over the long term (20312043), where growth is projected to hover around 5-6 percent-significantly higher than under the baseline-driven by higher private investment and the development of the non-oil private sector, reduced import dependence, and a larger export base.

- The current account deficit over the medium and long term is projected to be considerably smaller in comparison to the baseline scenario, reflecting both higher exports (economic diversification and exports of high value-added agricultural exports) and lower imports of goods and services (in line with lower fiscal spending and lower reliance on food imports).

## COUNTRY CLASSIFICATION AND DETERMINATION OF SCENARIO STRESS TESTS

12. The debt-carrying capacity is assessed to be weak (Text Table 6). Timor-Leste's debt carrying capacity is assessed to be weak according to the Composite Indicator index of 2.68-barely below the 2.69 threshold-, which is calculated based on the October 2023 World Economic Outlook and the 2022 Country Policy and Institutional Assessment. The Composite Indicator is based on a weighted average of the country's real GDP growth, remittances, international reserves,

11 Timor-Leste's fiscal multiplier, measured by the change in real non-oil GDP growth rate induced by a unit change in the primary balance (in percent of GDP), is estimated to be close to 0.1-0.15. This is in line with other estimates in the literature which estimate it to be in the range of 0.08-0.17. Low multipliers indicate that much of the spending leaks into imports and/or is low quality reflecting supply-side constraints. The long-run multiplier is assumed to be 0.

12 The positive impact of structural reforms often take time to materialize and could even entail short-term costs (e.g., labor and product market reforms). This is consistent with the macroeconomic impact of structural reforms seen across various IMF-supported programs (see Andritzky and others, 2021). Structural reforms are estimated to have a positive impact on real GDP growth of around 0.3 percentage points in the medium-term, and 2.5 percentage points over the long run.

world growth, and the Country Policy and Institutional Assessment score. 13  Accordingly, the debt sustainability analysis thresholds applicable for Timor-Leste are: 30 percent for the present value of the external debt-to-GDP ratio, 140 percent for the present value of the external debt-to-exports ratio, 10 percent for the external debt service to-exports ratio, 14 percent for the external debt service-to-revenue ratio, and 35 percent for the present value of the public debt-to-GDP ratio.

<!-- image -->


## 13. The size of the shock to the non-debt creating flows (foreign direct investment)-to-

- GDP ratio, and net current transfers-to-GDP and -to-exports was customized to account for

one-off and structural factors. First, there is a large outflow in foreign direct investment equivalent to $575 million in 2019 due to Petroleum Fund's investment in Timor-Gap to purchase the 56 percent stake in the Greater Sunrise joint venture. 14  To prevent this one-off deviation in foreign direct investment flows from inflating the foreign direct investment-to-GDP ratio shock, the

13 The calculation is based on 10-year averages of the variables, across 5 years of historical data and 5 years of projections, and the corresponding Country Policy and Institutional Assessment.

14  Timor Gap is an autonomous government agency with the mandate to conduct oil and gas business on behalf of the Timor-Leste Government.

historical average and the standard deviation corresponds to 2011-21 (excluding 2019). 15  Second, to prevent the structural oil production cycle from inflating the export shock and to account for the fact that petroleum production ceased in 2023, the export stress test was customized in line with the 2021 and 2022 Article IV consultation debt sustainability analyses. Third, the increase in Timorese workers' remittance outflows abroad has resulted in a shift from net current transfers inflows to net outflows in the last five years, which is projected to continue until the end of the projection horizon. To account for this shift, the historical average and the standard deviation of the current transfersto-GDP shock corresponds to 2017-21.

## 14. The commodity price shocks were introduced in a tailored stress test, with

adjustments made to the default settings. Lack of export diversification has resulted in excessive reliance of Timor-Leste's external position on petroleum and gas receipts-the share of commodity exports in Timor-Leste's total exports is 90 percent on average over 2019-21. However, this is projected to decline to close to 60 percent on average over 2022-24, as the petroleum production from active fields comes to an end in 2023. Hence, the commodity price shock is tailored by adjusting the share of fuel in total exports of goods and services to match the latter.

## 15. A tailored stress test on natural disasters is added to the sensitivity analysis given that

Timor-Leste is prone to natural disasters . The default setting (10 percent of GDP increase in debt stock, 1.5 percent decline in real GDP growth, and 3 percent decline in exports growth) was modified so that the stress test captures Timor-Leste's most recent experience with the cyclone and floods in April 2021. 16 The tailored stress test assumes that a natural disaster occurs in 2024 and that new debt is contracted to finance damages, increasing the public debt-to-GDP ratio by 14 percent in 2023, which is equivalent to the estimated damages from the April 2021 floods. 17  Real GDP and exports growth decline by 2 percent and 4 percent in FY2023, respectively, relative to the baseline. 18

## ASSESSMENT

## External Debt Sustainability Analysis

## 16. Under the baseline scenario, two of Timor-Leste's external debt indicators breach their respective debt sustainability analysis thresholds in the medium-term (Figure 1) . First, the

15 The customization implied that: (i) the historical average of the net non-debt creating flows (foreign direct investment)-to-GDP ratio is revised up from -1.5 to 2.8 and the standard deviation is reduced from 13.5 to 2.2; (ii) the initial standard deviation of 56.5 of the export shock was scaled down to 11.3; and (iii) the historical average of the current official transfers-to-GDP ratio is revised from 3.9 to -5.4 and the standard deviation is reduced from 13.7 to 2.2.

16 See Selected Issues Paper for the 2022 Article IV consultation.

17 See World Bank (2021) report on 'Learning from Tropical Cyclone Seroja: Building Disaster and Climate Resilience in Timor-Leste.'

18 The damages from Tropical Cyclone Seroja in April 2021 are estimated at US$245 million, which is historically the highest available estimates for economic damages. According to the International Disaster Database, the economic damages from previous natural disasters range from US$4 million to US$20 million.

present value of external debt in percent of exports breaches the indicative threshold of 140 percent between 2024 and 2028. Second, the debt service to exports ratio breaches the indicative threshold of 10 percent between 2024-30 (Figure 1). All other indicators remain well below their relevant thresholds for the next fifteen years. Debt dynamics reflect the following: (i) increase in debt service payments as grace periods on existing loans come to an end; and (ii) projected disbursement of external loans over the medium term and, thereafter, the government's strategy of increasing public external borrowing via concessional loans to reduce the need to tap the Petroleum Fund from the projected expansion of public investment in infrastructure projects. Over the medium term, the present value of external debt is projected to decline somewhat from 17 percent of non-oil GDP in 2023 to 14 percent in 2032 but will increase thereafter as the PF is depleted.

17. Debt dynamics show vulnerability to shocks to the primary balance, natural disasters, exports, contingent liabilities, and commodity prices. Standardized stress tests show that a shock to the primary balance and exports are the most extreme shocks to the debt trajectory, also causing breaches of the debt service-to-exports and the present value of debt-to-exports thresholds. Timor-Leste's high vulnerability to shocks reflects its very small exports and revenue bases, and, therefore, its exposure to high debt service payment risks if its Petroleum Fund assets are not taken into account.

## Public Debt Sustainability Analysis

18. Under the baseline scenario, the present value of the total public and publicly guaranteed debt-to-GDP ratio remains below the threshold level for the next fifteen years (Figure 2). However, this indicator is vulnerable to commodity price shocks and is expected to breach the threshold under the stress scenario starting in 2026. The Petroleum Fund is depleted towards the end of the twenty-year projection horizon, leading to all debt indicators breaching their respective debt sustainability analysis thresholds (Figure 1). This is projected to lead to a substantial jump in external borrowing resulting in a breach of all debt thresholds beyond 2039.

## Reform Scenario

19. Staff's reform scenario illustrates how fiscal consolidation coupled with structural reforms can ensure long-term fiscal and debt sustainability. The introduction of reforms significantly improves debt dynamics-the paths of debt burden indicators are better-over the next twenty years. The duration of the breach of the present value of external debt in percent of exports and the debt service-to-exports ratio in the medium-term is also smaller compared to the baseline. Importantly, the Petroleum Fund is stabilized and generates a sustainable stream of resources to finance the budget.

## RISK RATING AND VULNERABILITIES

20. While the debt sustainability analysis assigns Timor-Leste a mechanical rating of high risk of debt distress, judgement is applied to upgrade the rating to moderate. Under the

baseline scenario, the present value of debt-to-exports and  debt service-toexports breach the benchmark over 2024-30-generating a mechanical debt distress rating of high. The use of judgement invokes the country's large, liquid, and accessible net foreign assets saved in the Petroleum Fund, which serves as a strong mitigating factor allowing Timor-Leste to carry and service debt until 2039, even under the scenario of the most extreme shock case (i.e., the primary balance shock). 19 The present value of debt does not

<!-- image -->

exceed more than 25 percent of the projected value of the Petroleum Fund until 2036 under the baseline (Text Figure 11). Under the scenario of the most extreme shock case (i.e., primary balance shock), the present value of debt-to-Petroleum Fund assets reaches close to 43 percent by 2036. There is still time for the authorities to undertake the necessary policy adjustment to stabilize the Petroleum Fund balance (see ¶21). Conditional on the implementation of these reforms (¶22), the debt is sustainable. With this, the risk of debt distress-both external and overall-is assessed as 'moderate' with limited space to absorb shocks (see Figure 5), which is unchanged from the previous 2022 DSA rating.

## 21. The projected depletion of the Petroleum Fund within the 20-year horizon under current policies makes the case for urgent fiscal consolidation and implementation of

important structural reforms. Although the Petroleum Fund is projected to be depleted by 2039 under the baseline, it could be depleted much faster-for instance, with a nominal investment return of 2.5 percent, it would be depleted by 2037. Fiscal consolidation aiming to achieve a sustainable fiscal position in a 10-year horizon, supported by expenditure rationalization and domestic revenue mobilization, would allow decreasing withdrawals from the Petroleum Fund until they reach a level consistent with preserving the Petroleum Fund. This process should go hand in hand with structural reforms to improve the business environment and governance, enhance competitiveness, and strengthen the external sector position. The analysis also highlights the importance of enhancing the resilience to natural disasters and climate change, including by prioritizing climate adaptation investment. Lack of political consensus is a risk that could impede the reforms that are warranted to put the fiscal position on a sustainable footing and strengthen medium-term growth prospects. Although that risk has a high probability of materializing, the implementation of the reforms has higher probability. The development of the Greater Sunrise fields is uncertain given difficulties in finding a commercially viable option that is acceptable to all stakeholders.

19  The stock of outstanding public debt was 1 percent of the Petroleum Fund balance at end-2022.

22. The IMF and the World Bank stand ready to support the authorities in their efforts to ensure fiscal and debt sustainability. The authorities are aware of the challenge and requested extensive technical assistance from the IMF for ambitious fiscal reforms aiming to secure fiscal sustainability. As discussed in the Country Engagement Strategy prepared as part of the 2023 Article IV consultation, ongoing technical assistance on public financial management reforms by the IMF Fiscal Affairs Department, on revenue administration by the IMF Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Center, and on governance in anti-money laundering by the IMF Legal Department will support the authorities in ensuring fiscal and debt sustainability. The adoption of the Major Planning Options Law as specified in the new basic PFM law aims to bring more predictability to the budget process. The approval of a new procurement law that came into effect in January 2023 is intended to increase transparency and simplify the procurement process. The authorities also welcomed Fund assistance on a Fiscal Responsibility Law to help improve fiscal discipline. Moreover, the World Bank and the International Finance Corporation (IFC) have plans to provide technical assistance to improve the prospects for private sector development including ease of doing business, agriculture, and tourism.

23. At the same time, public debt management needs to be strengthened. 20 External borrowing should be embedded in a suitable institutional framework, supported by best practice debt management policies and procedures. Strengthening the organization and capacity of the debt management unit, including preparing a medium-term debt management strategy (MTDS), and upgrading debt recording software are key areas for capacity building. However, in the near term, there is a need to produce comprehensive and realistic debt servicing projections for the existing debt. The monitoring and reporting of fiscal risks-such as contingent liabilities related to credit guarantees, pensions, public corporations, and public-private partnerships-should also be improved.

## AUTHORITIES' VIEWS

24. While the authorities broadly agreed with staff's debt sustainability analysis and on the need to achieve fiscal sustainability, they emphasized urgent development needs. They agreed that their spending plans would lead to the eventual depletion of the Petroleum Fund and have flagged that-under the spending plans and forecasts that are outlined in the latest budgetdepletion could occur by 2034. However, they emphasized that the PF's balance remains large, and that accelerating growth and development were key to achieving fiscal sustainability. Over the medium term, they will calibrate fiscal policy to achieve the government's development objectives, including through prioritizing investment in infrastructure. The authorities agreed on the need to mobilize domestic tax revenues and improve tax administration and will prioritize VAT implementation, but agreed with staff on the need to proceed gradually.

20  There have not been any noteworthy improvements in data coverage and public debt management since the 2019 Article IV.

Table 1. Timor-Leste: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2020-2043

## (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.

2/ Derived as [r - g ρ (1+g)]/(1+g+ ρ +g ρ ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.

3/ The residual in debt-creating flows is financed through excess withdrawals from the Petroleum Fund. Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.

4/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.

5/  Defined as grants, concessional loans, and debt relief.

6/  Grant-equivalent financing includes grants provided directly to the government and through new borrowing (difference between the face value and the PV of new debt).

7/ Assumes that PV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.

8/ Historical averages are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability, whereas projections averages are over the first year of projection and the next 10 years.

9/ The grant element may be overestimated due to debt projections.


<!-- image -->

Grant element of new borrowing (% right scale)

<!-- image -->

## Table 2. Timor-Leste: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2020-2043

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Coverage of debt: The central government, government-guaranteed debt. Definition of external debt is Currency-based.

2/ The residual in debt-creating flows is financed through excess withdrawals from the Petroleum Fund.

3/ The underlying PV of external debt-to-GDP ratio under the public DSA differs from the external DSA with the size of differences depending on exchange rates projections.

4/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term, and short-term debt.

5/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period and other debt creating/reducing flows.

6/ Defined as a primary deficit minus a change in the public debt-to-GDP ratio ((-): a primary surplus), which would stabilizes the debt ratio only in the year in question.

7/ Historical averages are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability, whereas projections averages are over the first year of projection and the next 10 years.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->


2/ Variables include real GDP growth, GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.

3/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.

Table 4. Timor-Leste: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt, 2023-2033

(In percent)


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ A bold value indicates a breach of the benchmark.

2/ Variables include real GDP growth, GDP deflator and primary deficit in percent of GDP.

3/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.

<!-- image -->

Figure 1. Timor-Leste: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt under Alternative Scenarios, 2023-2043

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Baseline

Most extreme shock 1/

<!-- image -->

Note: "Yes" indicates any change to the size or interactions of the default settings for the stress tests.

"n.a." indicates that the stress test does not apply.

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in or before 2033. Stress tests with one-off breaches are also presented (if any), while these oneoff breaches are deemed away for mechanical signals. When a stress test with a one-off breach happens to be the most exterme shock even after disregarding the oneoff breach, only that stress test (with a one-off breach) would be presented.

2/ The magnitude of shocks used for the commodity price shock stress test are based on the commodity prices outlook prepared by the IMF research department.

PV of Debt-to-Exports Ratio

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio

<!-- image -->

Threshold

Reform Scenario

Historical scenario

<!-- image -->

* Note: All the additional financing needs generated by the shocks under the stress tests are assumed to be covered by PPG external MLT debt in the external DSA. Default terms of marginal debt are based on baseline 10-year projections.

Figure 2. Timor-Leste: Indicators of Public Debt under Alternative Scenarios, 2023-2043

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio

<!-- image -->


* Note: The public DSA allows for domestic financing to cover the additional financing needs generated by the shocks under the stress tests in the public DSA. Default terms of marginal debt are based on baseline 10-year projections.

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in or before 2033. The stress test with a one-off breach is also presented (if any), while the one-off breach is deemed away for mechanical signals. When a stress test with a one-off breach happens to be the most exterme shock even after disregarding the one-off breach, only that stress test (with a oneoff breach) would be presented.

<!-- image -->

Figure 4. Timor-Leste: Realism Tools

3-Year Adjustment in Primary Balance (Percentage points of GDP)

<!-- image -->

1/ Data cover Fund-supported programs for LICs (excluding emergency financing) approved since 1990. The size of 3-year adjustment from program inception is found on the horizontal axis; the percent of sample is found on the vertical axis.

Public and Private Investment Rates

(% of GDP)

<!-- image -->

Fiscal Adjustment and Possible Growth Paths 1/

<!-- image -->

1/ Bars refer to annual projected fiscal adjustment (right-hand side scale) and lines show possible real GDP growth paths under different fiscal multipliers (left-hand side scale).

Contribution to Real GDP Growth (percent, 5 year average)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->