<!-- image -->

April 27, 2020

## MALAWI

## REQUEST FOR DISBURSEMENT UNDER THE RAPID CREDIT FACILITY-DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS 1

S. Ali Abbas (IMF) and Marcello

Approved By David Robinson and Estevão (IDA)

Prepared by the staffs of International Monetary Fund and the International Development Association (IDA)



Malawi is at moderate risk of external debt distress with some space to absorb shocks and high risk of overall debt distress. Under the baseline scenario reflecting the macroeconomic impact and rise in external borrowing in 2020 related to the COVID-19 pandemic and a gradual increase in project loans over the medium term, a moderate rating is maintained for external debt distress with debt carrying capacity upgraded to 'medium' -revision in October 2019. The present value of total public debt to GDP is projected to exceed the benchmark for the near and medium terms and then gradually decline under the baseline scenario. This mainly reflects larger primary deficits during FY 2019/20-20/21 resulting in increasing amounts of domestic debt.

This DSA incorporates current projections of the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic: (i) GDP growth is expected to fall to 1 percent in 2020 and to 2.5 percent in 2021 as a lockdown substantially slows domestic activity, especially in domestic manufacturing and wholesale and retail trade, and the global and resultant regional economic slowdown is weighing on exports, remittances, and foreign direct investment (FDI); (ii) the domestic primary balance is expected to deteriorate (relative to pre-pandemic projections) to -3.4 percent of GDP in FY 2019/20 and -1.3 percent of GDP in FY 2020/21; (iii) the current account deficit is expected to widen to 18.1 percent of GDP in 2020 and remain broadly unchanged in 2021. However, the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and policy responses are rapidly evolving and risks are heavily tilted to the downside, which could lead to a faster-than-expected deterioration in external and public debt indicators.

3

Table 1. Malawi: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2017-2040


<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

4

Table 2. Malawi: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2017-2040 (in percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Coverage of debt: The central government, central bank, government-guaranteed debt. Definition of external debt is Currency-based.

2/ The underlying PV of external debt-to-GDP ratio under the public DSA differs from the external DSA with the size of differences depending on exchange rates projections.

3/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term, and short-term debt.

4/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period and other debt creating/reducing flows.

5/ Defined as a primary deficit minus a change in the public debt-to-GDP ratio ((-): a primary surplus), which would stabilizes the debt ratio only in the year in question.

6/ Historical averages are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability, whereas projections averages are over the first year of projection and the next 10 years.

Definition of external/domestic debt

Is there a material difference between the two criteria?

Currency-based

Yes

Public sector debt 1/

of which: local-currency denominated of which: foreign-currency denominated

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 1. Malawi: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2020-2030

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

PV of debt-to-exports ratio

Debt service-to-revenue ratio

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Note: "Yes" indicates any change to the size or interactions of the default settings for the stress tests. "n.a." indicates that the stress test does not apply.

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in or before 2030. Stress tests with one-off breaches are also presented (if any), while these one-off breaches are deemed away for mechanical signals. When a stress test with a one-off breach happens to be the most exterme shock even after disregarding the one-off breach, only that stress test (with a one-off breach) would be presented.

2/ The magnitude of shocks used for the commodity price shock stress test are based on the commodity prices outlook prepared by the IMF research department.


* Note: All the additional financing needs generated by the shocks under the stress tests are assumed to be covered by PPG external MLT debt in the external DSA. Default terms of marginal debt are based on baseline 10-year projections.

Figure 2. Malawi: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2020-2030

<!-- image -->


* Note: The public DSA allows for domestic financing to cover the additional financing needs generated by the shocks under the stress tests in the public DSA. Default terms of marginal debt are based on baseline 10-year projections.

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in or before 2030. The stress test with a one-off breach is also presented (if any), while the one-off breach is deemed away for mechanical signals. When a stress test with a one-off breach happens to be the most exterme shock even after disregarding the one-off breach, only that stress test (with a one-off breach) would be presented.

6

Table 3. Malawi: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2020-2030


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ A bold value indicates a breach of the threshold.

2/ Variables include real GDP growth, GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.

3/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.

Table 4. Malawi: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt, 2020-2030


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ A bold value indicates a breach of the threshold.

2/ Variables include real GDP growth, GDP deflator and primary deficit in percent of GDP.

3/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.

<!-- image -->

Figure 4. Malawi: Realism Tools

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->