## Annex I. Bank-Fund Debt Sustainability Analysis 1/

The updated DSA incorporates the economic and fiscal effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the revision of Niger's national accounts in the context of the migration to SNA 2008. Real GDP growth for 2020 has been cut to 1 percent, from 6 percent, and the fiscal deficit is now headed for 5 percent of GDP, compared to 2.7 percent of GDP previously projected. The implied financing gap is assumed to be filled by financial assistance from IFIs and donors at favorable terms. The long-term economic outlook remains largely intact, as does the thrust of economic policies.

This DSA continues to rate Niger's risk of debt distress as 'moderate.' But the setback from the pandemic has eroded buffers and downside risks to the outlook dominate, underscoring the need to mitigate debt vulnerabilities, especially vigilance in taking on external debt, stepped-up efforts to diversify exports, and attention to fiscal risks from PPPs and SOEs. Stress tests and alternative scenarios continue to demonstrate Niger's vulnerability to commodity price and export shocks.


1/ The coverage of the DSA remains unchanged compared to the previous DSA of June 2019 and comprises the central government, including funds borrowed for on-lending to SOEs, and guarantees for external borrowing by the private sector. Extrabudgetary funds no lot exist. Local governments and SOEs are not covered for lack of data.

1  Niger's debt-carrying capacity remains rated as 'medium,' with a composite indicator (CI) reading of 2.94 based on the October 2019 vintage of the World Economic Outlook (WEO) and the 2018 CPIA.

2  One-time breach of the threshold for the PV of PPG external debt in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic is discounted.

Figure 1. Niger: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2020-31

<!-- image -->

Debt service-to-exports ratio

<!-- image -->

Baseline

Historical scenario

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

1

Stress test with (the largest) one-off breach

<!-- image -->

Note: "Yes" indicates any change to the size or interactions of the default settings for the stress tests. "n.a." indicates that the stress test does not apply.

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in or before 2030. Stress tests with one-off breaches are also presented (if any), while these one-off breaches are deemed away for mechanical signals. When a stress test with a one-off breach happens to be the most exterme shock even after disregarding the one-off breach, only that stress test (with a one-off breach) would be presented.

2/ The magnitude of shocks used for the commodity price shock stress test are based on the commodity prices outlook prepared by the IMF research department.


* Note: All the additional financing needs generated by the shocks under the stress tests are assumed to be covered by PPG external MLT debt in the external DSA. Default terms of marginal debt are based on baseline 10-year projections.

<!-- image -->

Figure 2. Niger: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2020-31

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio


* Note: The public DSA allows for domestic financing to cover the additional financing needs generated by the shocks under the stress tests in the public DSA. Default terms of marginal debt are based on baseline 10-year projections.

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in or before 2030. The stress test with a one-off breach is also presented (if any), while the one-off breach is deemed away for mechanical signals. When a stress test with a one-off breach happens to be the most exterme shock even after disregarding the one-off breach, only that stress test (with a one-off breach) would be presented.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

30

31

Table 1. Niger: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2017-40

## (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)


<!-- image -->

External debt (nominal) 1/

<!-- image -->


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.

2/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.

3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.

4/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.

5/  Defined as grants, concessional loans, and debt relief.

6/  Grant-equivalent financing includes grants provided directly to the government and through new borrowing (difference between the face value and the PV of new debt).

7/ Assumes that PV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.

8/ Historical averages are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability, whereas projections averages are over the first year of projection and the next 10 years.

Table 2. Niger: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2017-40

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Coverage of debt: The central government plus extra budgetary funds, central bank, government-guaranteed debt. Definition of external debt is Currency-based.

2/ The underlying PV of external debt-to-GDP ratio under the public DSA differs from the external DSA with the size of differences depending on exchange rates projections.

3/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term, and short-term debt.

4/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period and other debt creating/reducing flows.

5/ Defined as a primary deficit minus a change in the public debt-to-GDP ratio ((-): a primary surplus), which would stabilizes the debt ratio only in the year in question.

6/ Historical averages are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability, whereas projections averages are over the first year of projection and the next 10 years.

Table 3. Niger: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2020-31


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ A bold value indicates a breach of the threshold.

2/ Variables include real GDP growth, GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.

3/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.

Table 4. Niger: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt, 2020-31


Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Variables include real GDP growth, GDP deflator and primary deficit in percent of GDP.

2/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.